[MUSIC]
>> Kyle: Saw a couple hands, yeah?
>> Speaker 2: Wouldn't you have 175?
>> Kyle: Sorry, I typed it wrong,
the question was wouldn't I have 175?
I just completely mistyped.
Yes, the end result would be 175.
Was that your question as well?
>> Speaker 3: Yeah, I just wanted to
make sure that I got the right answer.
>> Kyle: I have not had enough
coffee apparently I can't do my math
this morning, okay?
I said 175 and typed 125.
>> Kyle: Yes?
>> Speaker 4: There was a question,
is it possible for an app to have
all of their functions pured?
>> Kyle: Well,
we could quibble about that.
I would say in general, the takeaway would
be If your program was entirely pure
with no side effects, that would mean your
program would have no input our output.
And if no input or output, then your
program would be completely pointless.
If it had no effect on anything, there was
no observation of it, there was no state
change as a result of your program, then
I know what you can do with that program.
You can simply delete it,
because that's about how useful it is.
That's the glib way of saying
you're going to have to balance
where you need purity and where you don't.
And you notice, again, I didn't start
this workshop to say functional program,
function, do all functional,
do all functional.
Functional's cool, but it's not
the hammer that you use for everything.
The perspective that we're taking here
is there's some usefulness to it, and
there are places in our program that
will make it easier to reason about.
So I don't encourage you to write your
entire program in a functional style,
I've never once done that.
But I have used some of these functional
concepts in my regular programs, and
the places I've done it's
improved the understandibility,
the reasonability back out.
Good question online, thank you.
>> Kyle: Okay,
I see a question in the chat room.
Where would you use all these pure
functions if you're using frameworks like
angular and such?
My answer to this is not going
to be terribly satisfying,
but I'm not going to answer any
questions about frameworks.
Because that's way outside of the scope
of what we want to talk about here.
I'm not an angular expert,
there's plenty of people,
who are very smart about angular.
And I would recommend,
if you're doing angular programming
embrace the angular way.
Okay, because angular
has a way of doing it.
If you're doing react,
embrace the react way.
My goal is to really sit at a lower
level than frameworks and to talk about
the mechanisms of the language itself and
how we can use this mechanisms.
So, I think that's entirely possible
that you might be able to improve
some of your angular code with some
functional live programming concepts, but
the chances are you are not going to be
able to do a full functional programming
pass and
still use angular because that's just not
the mindset that they used
to design that framework.
The same would be true for react, and
ember, and backbone and all of that.
That's one of the reasons why I am
teaching this workshop, by the way.
As I am trying to make some this stuff
more palatable, even in mixed environments
where you know you're not going to be able
to go entirely functional programming,
these are little tiny tools that we can
use in very tactical specific ways.
Yes?
>> Speaker 4: We're kind of
getting a few here, so.
>> Kyle: Okay, great.
>> Speaker 4: Bear with me.
Is it best to return an array?
What else could we return?
What are the way could return Y and
Z keep the functions up here, sorry.
>> Kyle: You're going to have to wrap it
in some container, the two fundamental
containers that we have in JavaScript
are going to be the array and the object.
So we could have gone to the trouble of
assigning several different values and
the properties and the object.
Usually, functional
programmers like array.
They like lists because lists are very
convenient to do operations on.
So, my instinct in a functional
programming mindset or
anything that's even remotely
close to functional programming,
my instinct is to reach for
the array before I reach for the object.
But, any kind of container would do.
I mean, even a more sophisticated
container like a map or a set or
something if you wanted to.
You're going to have to have some
container because syntactically,
the language only allows you
to return as single value,
if you need to return multiple values.
Another way of answering that I guess
is to say refactor your program so
you don't have to return multiple values.
But that may not be something
that you use as general advice.
So when you do have to have
multiple side effects,
you're going to need some container
with the return keyboard.
>> Speaker 4: Can you repeat
what a pure function is?
>> Kyle: Yes.
A pure function is a function
that has no side effects.
It operates entirely on its own variables,
its own state, or
any of the things that are passed into it.
So the arguments that are passed in, and
any of its own- it
operates entirely on that.
And does not change anything.
A pure function does not mean
it doesn't access outside state,
it means it doesn't
change the outside state.
So there's no side effects.
So I could write a function that accesses
a variable outside of itself, and
that's totally okay.
And that's not going to be considered,
at least from our perspective for
our intents and purposes.
That's not going to be considered
an impure function, except for
the fact that that variable now can
change from out underneath this function,
so the overall reasonability
of the program is less pure.
But the function itself we still
call pure because it's not,
it does not have a side effect.
So if you take precautions to make sure
that you do not do side effects in
a particular piece of your program,
then that piece of your program is pure.
>> Speaker 5: If I run this program,
I get z is undefined or something.
>> Kyle: Well, here we're not, so
the question was Z is undefined.
The way I rewrote this,
I'm not using Z anymore externally.
Remember, z is only being used internally.
That was part of the point.
Z was a set of state that we didn't
want to change on the outside, so
we encapsulated it as a local
variable inside of bar.
We do use it for the brief period
of time between when we declare and
while foo is running, it's changing, and
then we return it, so we do have it there.
But it's not exposed on the outside,
that's intentional.
>> Speaker 4: This might have been,
I don't know if this is out of order, but
they were asking why do we return z if
it's not being passed in and changed?
But I don't think we are any more, right?
>> Kyle: Okay, so
that's actually a very good question.
We are returning z,
we're not passing z in.
Z is not an input, z is an output.
Z is how I observe the output
of this particular program.
If I didn't give you z, it wouldn't be
a terribly useful program, would it?
So this is, again, we're not going
to get way deep in the weens
of functional programming, but this is
one of the ways you can think about,
as a functional programmer, even doing
side effects without side effects,
is to simply pass in
everything that's needed and
return everything back that's
needed to be observed.
Passing the inputs, receive the outputs.
So here, one of the direct outputs is the
Z variable, and one of the side outputs,
one of the state that we may or
may not choose to track and
use later, is that Y variable.
So I'm returning both of those, and that's
why I need some container around me.
>> Kyle: We good?
All right, excellent.
Those are fantastic questions,
thanks very much for that.
That's exactly the kind of thing that
we want to pay our attention to.